Explain how to use uv with airflow virtualenv and make it works (#43604)
mistercrunch/Airflow: contributing-docs/07_local_virtualenv.rst

* libxml
* helm (only for helm chart tests)

There are also sometimes other system level packages needed to install python packages - especially
those that are coming from providers. For example you might need to install ``pkgconf`` to be able to

> install ``mysqlclient`` package. Or you might need to install ``graphviz`` to be able to install

Author: ```suggestion
install ``mysqlclient`` package for ``mysql`` provider . Or you might need to install ``graphviz`` to be able to install
```

> install ``mysqlclient`` package for ``mysql`` provider . Or you might need to install ``graphviz`` to be able to install
> ``devel`` package.

Author: ```suggestion
install ``mysqlclient`` package for ``mysql`` provider . Or you might need to install ``graphviz`` to be able to install
``devel`` extra bundle.
```

   released wheel packages.

Creating and maintaining local virtualenv with uv
-------------------------------------------------

As of November 2024 we are recommending to use ``uv`` for local virtualenv management for Airflow development.

> Th e``uv`` is a build frontend tool that is designed to manage python, virtualenvs and workspaces for development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``uv`` utility is a build frontend tool that is designed to manage python, virtualenvs and workspaces for development
```

> Th e``uv`` is a build frontend tool that is designed to manage python, virtualenvs and workspaces for development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``uv`` is a build frontend tool that is designed to manage python, virtualenvs and workspaces for development
```

and testing of Python projects. It is a modern tool that is designed to work with PEP 517/518 compliant projects
and it is much faster than "reference" ``pip`` tool. It has extensive support to not only create development
environment but also to manage python versions, development environments, workspaces and Python tools used
to develop Airflow (via ``uv tool`` command - such as ``pre-commit`` and others, you can also use ``uv tool``

> to install ``breeze`` - containerized development environment that we use to be able to reproduce the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to install ``breeze`` - containerized development environment for Airflow that we use to reproduce the
```

CI environment locally and to run release-management and certain development tasks.

You can read more about ``uv`` in `UV Getting started <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/>`_ but
below you will find a few typical steps to get you started with ``uv``.

Installing uv
.............

You can follow the `installation instructions <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/>`_ to install
``uv`` on your system. Once you have ``uv`` installed, you can do all the environment preparation tasks using
``uv`` commands.

Installing Python versions
..........................

You can install Python versions using ``uv python install`` command. For example, to install Python 3.9.7, you can run:

.. code:: bash

    uv python install 3.9.7

> This is optional step - UV will automatically install the Python version you need when you create a virtualenv.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is optional step - ``uv`` will automatically install the Python version you need when you create a virtualenv.
```

Creating virtualenvs with uv
............................

.. code:: bash

>     uv venv

Reviewer: How does it otherwise detect the version?

Author: It uses default version that the project supports (from `pyproject.toml`) - which is Python 3.12. That's the default behaviour of `uv`. If you think it's worth adding it, feel free :).

Reviewer: Not needed, sounds good like this

Reviewer: It was my curiosity that asked this :)

This will create a default venv in your project's ``.venv`` directory. You can also create a venv
with a specific Python version by running:

.. code:: bash

    uv venv --python 3.9.7

> You can also create a venv with a different folder name by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create a venv with a different venv directory name by running:
```

.. code:: bash

    uv venv .my-venv

> However UV creation/re-creation of venvs is so fast that you can easily create and delete venvs as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However ``uv`` creation/re-creation of venvs is so fast that you can easily create and delete venvs as needed.
```

So usually you do not need to have more than one venv and recreate it as needed - for example when you

> need to change python version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to change the python version.
```

Syncing project (including providers) with uv
.............................................

In a project like airflow it's important to have a consistent set of dependencies across all developers.
You can use ``uv sync`` to install dependencies from ``pyproject.toml`` file. This will install all dependencies
from the ``pyproject.toml`` file in the current directory.

.. code:: bash

    uv sync

If you also need to install development and provider dependencies you can specify extras for that providers:

.. code:: bash

    uv sync --extra devel --extra devel-tests --extra google

This will synchronize all extras that you need for development and testing of Airflow and google provider
dependencies - including their runtime dependencies.

.. code:: bash

>     uv sync --all-extras

Reviewer: Tried this and only pygraphviz fails:
```
[stderr]
/Users/amoghdesai/.cache/uv/builds-v0/.tmpScysKG/lib/python3.9/site-packages/setuptools/_distutils/dist.py:261: UserWarning: Unknown distribution option: 'tests_require'
  warnings.warn(msg)
warning: no files found matching '*.png' under directory 'doc'
warning: no files found matching '*.txt' under directory 'doc'
warning: no files found matching '*.css' under directory 'doc'
warning: no previously-included files matching '*~' found anywhere in distribution
warning: no previously-included files matching '*.pyc' found anywhere in distribution
warning: no previously-included files matching '.svn' found anywhere in distribution
no previously-included directories found matching 'doc/build'
pygraphviz/graphviz_wrap.c:3020:10: fatal error: 'graphviz/cgraph.h' file not found
#include "graphviz/cgraph.h"
         ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 error generated.
error: command '/usr/bin/clang' failed with exit code 1
  Caused by: This error likely indicates that you need to install a library that provides "graphviz/cgraph.h" for pygraphviz@1.11
```
We should add that graphviz will be needed here

Reviewer: Okay pkg-config also:
```

[stdout]
Trying pkg-config --exists mysqlclient
Command 'pkg-config --exists mysqlclient' returned non-zero exit status 127.
Trying pkg-config --exists mariadb
Command 'pkg-config --exists mariadb' returned non-zero exit status 127.
Trying pkg-config --exists libmariadb
Command 'pkg-config --exists libmariadb' returned non-zero exit status 127.
Trying pkg-config --exists perconaserverclient
Command 'pkg-config --exists perconaserverclient' returned non-zero exit status 127.

[stderr]
/bin/sh: pkg-config: command not found
/bin/sh: pkg-config: command not found
/bin/sh: pkg-config: command not found
/bin/sh: pkg-config: command not found
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<string>", line 14, in <module>
  File "/Users/amoghdesai/.cache/uv/builds-v0/.tmpeV7Qf0/lib/python3.9/site-packages/setuptools/build_meta.py", line 333, in get_requires_for_build_wheel
    return self._get_build_requires(config_settings, requirements=[])
  File "/Users/amoghdesai/.cache/uv/builds-v0/.tmpeV7Qf0/lib/python3.9/site-packages/setuptools/build_meta.py", line 303, in _get_build_requires
    self.run_setup()
  File "/Users/amoghdesai/.cache/uv/builds-v0/.tmpeV7Qf0/lib/python3.9/site-packages/setuptools/build_meta.py", line 319, in run_setup
    exec(code, locals())
  File "<string>", line 155, in <module>
  File "<string>", line 49, in get_config_posix
  File "<string>", line 28, in find_package_name
Exception: Can not find valid pkg-config name.
Specify MYSQLCLIENT_CFLAGS and MYSQLCLIENT_LDFLAGS env vars manually
```

Reviewer: So its graphviz + pkg-conf

Author: Yeah. Both are mentioned in prerequisites actually, but I am thinking maybe it's worth to disable those for MacOS and have some special way of installing those? 

Both are not difficult to install (graphviz a little more than pkg-config), but yes they introduce some friction that is avoidable.

Though a bit of a problem is that mysqlclient is **only** needed by mysql provider, not the mysql support as metadatadb, so we could potentially disable those on MacOS. 

A bit of a problem there is that it will generally "stop" working (in a bit cryptic way) when you want to either want to produce dag output in graphical form from Airflow or produce the ERD charts, or when you want to test mysql provider on MacOS (I think the first two is not a problem - and we could handle failing imports and print appropriate messages, the mysql provider is somewhat problematic - because people might use mysql provider for development/testing on MacOS.

But maybe there also we could handle import error in a nice way and even check "if darwin -> follow those instructions to use mysql provider on MacOS"..

WDYT?

Author: I went ahead and implemented it - now all three: plyvel, mysqlclient, graphviz will not be installed by default on mac - you will get error messages if you try to use any of them explaining that you need to install them.

Reviewer: Good enough. Makes sense

install the dependencies automatically when you create or switch to a development environment.

Installing "golden" version of dependencies
-------------------------------------------

Whatever virtualenv solution you use, when you want to make sure you are using the same

> version of dependencies as in main, you can install recommended version of the dependencies by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version of dependencies as in main, you can install recommended version of the dependencies by using pip:
```
